---
title: 'AI in Software: It's The End Of The World As We Know It (and I Feel Fine!)'
publishedAt: '2025-06-17'
summary: `Recently the oven in my house finally crapped out. A 1998 GE Wall Oven and
Microwave combination. Thing served us well. Decided to get a whole new suite of
appliances. Lo and behold, the newest hot cheese all of these offer is "AI." I
saw one that had a camera that claimed it could use AI to prevent my food from
overcooking. Fridges that could keep an inventory of what was inside.
Dishwashers that could wash dishes. That one was not AI; our old dishwasher just
sucked. It seems you can not buy a toaster these days without it promising some
kind of AI magic. The hype is everywhere. Since I get paid to program computers,
I am less concerned with vibe toasted toast and more interested in what this AI
craze means for my own line of work.`
---

Recently the oven in my house finally crapped out. A 1998 GE Wall Oven and
Microwave combination. Thing served us well. Decided to get a whole new suite of
appliances. Lo and behold, the newest hot cheese all of these offer is "AI." I
saw one that had a camera that claimed it could use AI to prevent my food from
overcooking. Fridges that could keep an inventory of what was inside.
Dishwashers that could wash dishes. That one was not AI; our old dishwasher just
sucked. It seems you can not buy a toaster these days without it promising some
kind of AI magic. The hype is everywhere. Since I get paid to program computers,
I am less concerned with vibe toasted toast and more interested in what this AI
craze means for my own line of work.

There is good news and there is bad news. The bad news is that the work that we
software engineers do will never be the same. The good news, however, is that
the fundamentals that make one a "good" engineer are not changing and are more
valuable than ever.

### Do Not Kid Yourself, Writing Code Is The Easy Part

Let us be honest. For most of us, the hardest part of the job is not the code
itself. We are not writing hardcore, performance-critical algorithms every day.
We are tweaking configurations, adding a new feature to an existing workflow, or
implementing a standard CRUDL screen. These are largely solved problems, the
bread-and-butter tasks of modern software development.

Many of us spent untold hours grinding LeetCode, memorizing algorithms we rarely
use, all to pass an interview. If the "big tech industrial complex" wants to
tell me that implementing a binary tree from scratch is the peak of engineering,
I will happily let an AI take that job. I would much rather spend my time
understanding a customer's problem and designing a real solution.

This brings us to the obsession with "code craftsmanship." We love to debate the
perfect abstraction or the most elegant syntax. But in a professional context,
that is rarely the point. Similar to driving, most of us are paid to be truck
drivers, not F1 racers. Our goal is to deliver business value safely and
reliably, not to win style points for a perfect lap time. The intent of our code
is to solve a problem for a customer.

This is not an excuse to write hot garbage. In fact, it is the opposite. A good
truck driver keeps their rig well-maintained. Good code: code that is simple,
clear, and easy to change is how we deliver value reliably over the long haul.
Think about the worst legacy system you have ever inherited. Was it "small and
simple," or was it a monument to over-engineered complexity? Your judgment in
what makes a solution good and sensible is more critical than ever, even if you
are not the one typing every line.

If writing mountains of cheap code was the secret to success, our industry would
have been completely offshored decades ago, following the same playbook that
hollowed out countless manufacturing jobs in the United States and The West post
1990s. However, that is not what happened. The push to send software jobs
overseas has been a constant threat for decades, yet here many of us are still
employed and in demand right here at home. The reason you were not replaced by a
cheaper offshore team is the exact same reason you will not be totally replaced
by an AI: proximity. You are close to the business problems, the product
managers, and the customers. You have context. That is your moat. That is the
hard part of the job.

### Computers Are Bad at Prime Numbers

We like to think of computers as flawless math machines, but even they have
their limits. Take prime numbers. It is trivial for a computer to multiply two
massive prime numbers together. However, if you give that same computer the
resulting product and ask it to find the original two primes, the task becomes
practically impossible. This is not a bug; it is a fundamental computational
boundary, so difficult to cross that we have built the entire foundation of
internet security upon it.

LLMs have their own boundaries. At their core, LLMs are
incredibly sophisticated pattern-matchers. We have gone from tricking silicon
rocks into doing math to tricking statistical models into writing code. They are
trained on a diet of the entire internet and can generate something that looks
right with terrifying accuracy. But "looks right" and "is right" are two very
different things.

This is where you, the engineer, become more critical than ever. The AI ca not
truly grasp the why behind the code. Your job is to be the arbiter of
"correctness," which is a far more complex question than it seems. Does the code
meet the requirements and business goals? Is it robust, well-tested, and
performant? Is it secure and maintainable, or a tangled mess for the next
person? The AI ca not answer these questions because it lacks context. It is a
tool, like a power drill or a compiler. You are the creative force, the problem
solver, and the ultimate quality check. You are the one who provides the
judgment.

### Become a Force Multiplier

Having an AI that writes code is like having the world's most enthusiastic
junior developer on your team. They are tireless, have the book knowledge of a
principal engineer, and can generate code at a staggering pace. But like any
junior, they have little real-world context and will build exactly what you ask
for, even if it is a terrible idea.

Your job is no longer to be the primary person typing at the keyboard. Your new
job is to be the director, the architect, and the ultimate quality check. You
are there to take the raw, powerful output of the AI and shape it into something
that is not just functional, but truly valuable. You must become a force
multiplier.

First, you must master the art of the review. Your most critical technical skill
is about to become the code review, and this is not about finding typos or
suggesting a more clever variable name; the AI will likely get that right. It is
about applying your hard-won experience to ask the important questions. Is this
solution simple and maintainable? Will your team be able to understand this in
six months? Does this code fit our existing architecture, or is it a shiny new
thing that will create a mess down the road? You are the gatekeeper of quality
and sanity.

Remember Tom Smykowski from Office Space? He proudly claimed, "I have people
skills," acting as the crucial link between customers and engineers? Ironically,
in today's AI-driven world, that role is more important than ever. The "how" is
shifting your work upstream. Before generating code, you define the problem with
extreme clarity. You craft a rich, context-aware prompt: "We need a Go function
that listens on this SQS queue, processes a payload with these exact fields,
uses a DynamoDB table for idempotent locking, and follows the error-handling
patterns in this specific file." A lazy prompt gets you lazy code. A great
prompt gets you 80% of the way to a solution.

You have to solve problems, not just tickets. The AI can write code to close a
ticket. It cannot, however, look at a system holistically and identify the root
cause of a recurring outage. It cannot design a scalable architecture that will
support the next five years of product growth. This requires shifting your focus
from the micro-level task (How do I write this function?) to the macro-level
strategy (Are we building something that serves the customer and the
business?). You are no longer just a software engineer; you are a technical
problem-solver who uses code as one tool in your belt.

The future is not about how fast you can type. It is about the quality of your
judgment. The AI provides the leverage; you provide the wisdom.
