export const intro = `
Recently, I started a new role as a Software Engineer at Reify Health. Unlike any other role that I have had, a 
huge part of our product stack is written in Clojure and ClojureScript. Thankfully, I have spent my last few years 
as a JS/TS dev working with React and as a result, have employed and appreciated a very functional style. 
ClojureScript has unlocked whole new levels of productivity in JavaScript and React. Particularly, it has shut the 
door on patterns that are pain points and allowed for new paradigms that JavaScript did not elegantly allow one to express.`;

export const date = "5/2/2021";
export const title =
  "Lessons On Writing JavaScript and React From ClojureScript";

<TitleText mt={3} title={title} date={date} />

<p>{intro}</p>

### Primer

Clojure is a lisp, unlike JS it has very little syntax. Want to declare a
function?

```clojure
(defn add-two [x y]
	(+ x y))
```

vs.

```js
function addTwo(x, y) {
  return x + y;
}
// or...
const alsoAddTwo = (x, y) => x + y;
```

By little syntax, I don't mean the code golf of how many characters it takes to
express an idea. I mean the amount of symbols that it takes to express the
language. In Clojure, the syntax is largely parenthesis and functions. There are
also `@` symbols for expressing async behavior. I enjoy it because there is
little cognitive load in terms of understanding what the program is doing.

React has a lot of ways of managing state. Popular ones include `useState` and
`useReducer` with `useContext`. There are also libraries like `mobx` and `redux`
that force one down a certain path. React has a wrapper in ClojureScript called
`reagent` which uses what is called `r/atoms`. A comparison:

```js
import {useContext, useState, createContext} from 'react'

const MyContext = createContext()

const ContextProvider = ({children}) => {
	const [clicks, clicksSet] = useState(0);
	return (
		<MyContext.Provider value={{clicks, clicksSet}}>
			{children}
		</MyContext.Provider>
	);
}

const countingComponent = () => {
	const [clicks, clickSet] = useContext(MyContext);
	return (
		<div> The atom has <code>clicks</code> has value {clicks}.
			<input type="button" value="Click me!" onClick={()=> clicksSet((c) => c+1)}>
		</div>
	);
}
```

vs.

```clojure
(ns clicks.core
  (:require [reagent.core :as r]))

(def clicks (r/atom 0))

(defn counting-component []
  [:div
   "The atom " [:code "clicks"] " has value: "
   @clicks ". "
   [:input {:type "button" :value "Click me!"
            :on-click #(swap! clicks inc)}]])
```

While trivial examples, what is demonstrated here is that one does not need to
declare a context at or worry about context HOCs when working in ClojureScript.

// One does have full interop with React those, so you can choose to. That
brings us to our first lesson.

## You do not hate Redux or Flux, you hate boilerplate

ClojureScript Reagent apps often leverage two libraries to manage state on the
front end: Fulcro and Re-frame. We will focus on the re-frame method of doing
things since it is similar to a popular, yet commonly maligned pattern used in
the React universe: flux through [Redux](https://react-redux.js.org/).

Why do folks use things like Redux? Redux creates a global state store, lets
users dispatch actions to update it, and create subscriptions into the data
store to read out of it. State is updated by the reducer returning a new object
with the updated state. A shallow comparison is done on the updated values, so
it must be done immutably. Instead of managing your application state all over
the place in different contexts and/or components, developers just manage it all
at the top. This is not far off from how many "traditional" applications have
been designed for years.

Web applications do not have to be some abomination. One can model them like any
other system: Views that are derived from some sort of database. APIs often do
this through RESTful endpoints that sit on top of some database. Reads and
writes into that database are often times done predictably at different layers
of the application. There is no reason why one can not model front ends of an
application to look the same way. Instead of an endpoint sitting atop a
database, it is a React component with a selector that sits on top of a redux
store. Instead of writing SQL, one would write the path to the useful data in
JSON. Like SQL does with views, one can even create more pointed (and often
performant) queries through using selectors. In redux-land, this is done by
taking advantage of memoization.

While hooks have made the boilerplate less stressful, they do pack a lot into a
component: Particularly the selector and the dispatch. One can organize all of
these things into named queries, but that is something that is on the user and
requires even more boilerplate. The typical process in a JS app is to create the
reducers to represent the state, put those into a redux provider, create actions
that update the reducer, and create components that allow for the user to read
from the store as well as dispatch actions. I'd give a full example of redux
boilerplate, but most readers (myself included) would probably get board and not
read the other points.
[Take Twitter's word for it.](https://twitter.com/search?q=Redux%20Boilerplate)

Most modern front end web applications also require some sort of network
communication with a backend server. Often, Redux users just accomplish this
through using something like
[Redux Thunk](https://github.com/reduxjs/redux-thunk). This allows async logic
to exist inside of dispatched actions. This is a very nice feature and why I
still prefer redux for API requests over the context API, which would require
one to keep passing the `dispatch` function created by `useReducer` throughout
the call stack. One can go even further and create observables to handle these
concerns using something called [Redux Saga](https://redux-saga.js.org/).

### Enter, Re-Frame

Why is it that Clojure Developers can follow almost this same pattern to a tee,
but not have the same complaints? The smaller language footprint and stronger
resources at the language level make it easier to do write expressive code and
reduce boilerplate. For example, actions in Redux give a named `type` that is
then sent off to a reducer which evaluates that type as part of a `switch`
statement. One usually does this by having to create strings by hand, export
them, and import them all over the place to solve this. TypeScript let folks
create enums, which is nice on the definition side, but still requires imports.
Clojure let's folks make keywords. `:hello` will be evaluated the same
throughout the program. However, this is a shortcut and most folks will have the
keywords "fully qualified." In this case one would declare `::hello` in a
namespace and it would be bound to that namespace. One can still import and
export it though, but one never has to worry about the string level collisions
that could happen in a JS app.

Re-frame doesn't use actions, it uses something called effects. Effects, like
actions, are dispatched by components (or other effects), and update the state.
As opposed to creating an action that gets dispatched to a reducer, the effect
just goes ahead and updates the db directly. This is accomplished by returning a
new version of the db with the updated values. Redux is technically doing this
too (that is what one is doing with `default: return state`). Whats nice about
Clojure is that there are more tools to update the db object without mutation
since the language is immutable by default. In ClojureScript, one never even has
to having to worry about things like immutablejs or immer because immutable
functions are the standard library. Additionally, these effects frequently times
may also do an http call through something like
[re-frame's `http-fx` library](https://github.com/day8/re-frame-http-fx).
`http-fx` provides consistent bindings for doing http calls as a re-frame effect
and provides hooks into paths for the application to take depending on the
result of the http call (such as success or failure).

Reframe uses subscriptions to fish data out of the database. While re-frame does
support reading out of the database and shipping the result to the component, it
also
[provides a model](https://day8.github.io/re-frame/subscriptions/#the-four-layers)
for users to create complicated compounded subscriptions in a performant way
using materialized views. This is similar to application developers creating
materialized views on top of larger data sets to achieve better performance and
following the model of writing a web application like any traditional
application.

It is worth adding that similar to redux, there is one big global state store in
re-frame. One declares this up front by creating the initial app-db, which is
really just one big reagent/atom. Like Redux, one may put default state values
in there. One may even take advantage of libraries like `datascript` to have a
more database-like interface into the state rather than just updating an object.

What does all this look like? How can it have less boilerplate?

```clojure
(ns example.core
  (:require
    [re-frame.core :as rf]))

;; effect to set a value in the db
(rf/reg-event-db
  :set-value
  (fn [db [_ v]]
  (assoc db
    :value v)))

;; Subsription to read value out of the db
(rf/reg-sub
 :read-name
 (fn [db]
   (:value db)))

;; use in a component
(defn my-component []
  (let [value @(rf/subscribe [:read-name])]
	[:div
      [:div (str "My Value is " value)]
      [:button {:on-click #((rf/dispatch [:set-value (inc value)]))} "increase"]]))
```

That's only the beginning with what re-frame can give one as a developer. It has
great devtools with [re-frame-10x](https://github.com/day8/re-frame-10x), a rock
solid stable API, and [fantastic docs](https://day8.github.io/re-frame/)!

## React wants to be immutable, JavaScript wants to mutate

I first fell in love with immutability and functional programming when working
with Scala. It was fascinating to me that one could just have an application be
an expression based on top of data. By avoiding mutation wherever possible, even
completely, programs were so much easier to reason with. React allows for one to
exercise this passion on the front end. However, JavaScript in a way makes you
do this with a hand behind you back. It only has two data types that have first
class immutability: objects and arrays. Arguably, the first class immutability
also really only exists in a subset of features such as spread syntax and
Array's `.slice`. While JavaScript has other data types too such as a `Set`, the
API for it is designed for it to be mutable. What one could have first class
performant immutable data structures and a fantastic standard library to mutate
them, AND run it in the browser? Enter again: ClojureScript.

ClojureScript, though implementing the Clojure's core library, gives folks
access to all of Clojure's
[data structures](https://clojure.org/reference/data_structures). The
[collections](https://clojure.org/reference/data_structures#Collections) and
libraries around them are especially powerful. The key is that under the hood,
they are implemented with _only_ immutability in mind using techniques such as
structural sharing, making them far more performant than just doing the
operations on objects. There are libraries such as immutablejs that allow for
folks to get a lot of these tools as well, but having it native to the language
is next level in terms of support and documentation. Lets start with a trivial
example such as updating a nested value in an object immutably.

```js
const obj = { i: { j: { k: 1 } } };

// update k by one immutably
const newObj = { ...obj, i: { ...obj.i, j: { ...obj.i.j, k: obj.i.j.k + 1 } } };
```

```clojure
(def obj {:i {:j {:k 1}}})

; update k by one immutably
(def new-obj (update-in obj [:i :j :k] inc))
```

Despite Clojure's somewhat deserved reputation of having a lot of parentheses,
the Clojure update is a lot simpler! This is really just the beginning. `assoc`
has far better ergonomics than something like a spread and adding of a new key
or `Object.assign` and is far more performant since ClojureScript is a compiled
language. Albeit, ClojureScript is compiled to JavaScript, but compilation
allows for one to write their code to be far more declarative. The JavaScript
that is outputted by ClojureScript is even optimized by Google's Closure
Compiler resulting in highly efficient sources.

Interestingly, React's original author
[Jordan Walke](https://twitter.com/jordwalke) must have somewhat agreed with the
above because after React, he went on to create a functional immutability first
language called [ReasonML](https://reasonml.github.io/) that also compiles down
to JavaScript. While ReasonML is by all accounts fantastic, it is not the
subject to which I am writing 😉.

## JSX a is gateway drug. Say no to drugs.

[At Reactathon in 2019, I recall somebody calling JSX: the "Gateway Drug to React"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mtjHxwUQUs0)
(Can't recall who said it, and don't have 5 hours to re-watch it all). It makes
React easy to pick up for someone that knows a little JavaScript and HTML.
However, HTML is _too_ declarative of an S-expression to be efficient in
constructing the DOM. In fact, after working with ClojureScript, I do not think
JavaScript even has the language tools to build S-expressions elegantly. Many
products built on the web platform boil down to developers writing code using
three technologies:

- HTML -> What does the user see?
- JS -> Change what the user sees!
- CSS -> Make it pretty!

React gives developers the opportunity to write all of these things inside of
their JavaScript files. For example, one can write a pretty simple component.

```jsx
function Component() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0);
  return (
    <button className="my-class" onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>
      {count}
    </button>
  );
}
```

Having the ability to write something that looks like HTML in the JavaScript
makes it very easy to learn and work with. However, XML is a pretty poor data
type to use for this problem. The JSX actually gets transformed into function
calls. Particularly, this is accomplished with
[`React.createElement`](https://reactjs.org/docs/react-api.html#createelement)
taking in three arguments:

- Tag name
- Props
- Children

Hmm, positional arguments! What is a data type that exists in JavaScript that
helps us with positions. Arrays! Could that button above be made like...

```js
function Component() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0);
  return ["button" {className: "my-class", onClick: () => setCount(count + 1)} ["count"]]
}
```

Was this ever explored as an alternative to JSX? While dumbed down, it does use
native data structures which would have an advantage of being more easily able
to parse out than jsx. However, since JavaScript does not have as strong of an
ability to create data with expressions, developers do not really gain anything.

Let's say you had a component that looked like this

```jsx
function Component({ children }) {
  const { data, loading, error } = useGetMyData();
  if (loading) {
    return;
    <div>
      <div>loading...</div>
      {children}
    </div>;
  }
  if (error) {
    console.error("Uh oh!");
    return (
      <div>
        <div style={{ color: "red" }}>{error.message}</div>
        {children}
      </div>
    );
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <div>Data:</div>
      <div style={{ color: "green" }}>{data}</div>
      {children}
    </div>
  );
}
```

One can write something like an Immediately-invoked Function Expression (IIFE)
in an effort to make this more expressive:

```jsx
function Component({ children }) {
  const { data, loading, error } = useGetMyData();

  return (
    <div>
      {(function () {
        if (loading) {
          return;
          <div>
            <div>loading...</div>
            {children}
          </div>;
        }
        if (error) {
          console.error("Uh oh!");
          return (
            <div>
              <div style={{ color: "red" }}>{error.message}</div>
              {children}
            </div>
          );
        }
        return (
          <>
            <div>Data:</div>
            <div style={{ color: "green" }}>{data}</div>
          </>
        );
      })()}
      {children}
    </div>
  );
}
```

JSX already has enough ugliness to it, adding an IIFE arguably makes things even
more confusing and perhaps harder in the future to debug. One could also make
another component, but that would be even more boilerplate and code to maintain.
This isn't a problem with React. React _wants_ you to put an expression in
there. Technically, it is possible to do with nested ternary operators, but even
that gets more confusing.

Clojure as stated before takes the attitude of using a vector (similar to an
array in js) to express the markup as opposed to XML in a format called
[hiccup](https://github.com/weavejester/hiccup). This can become even denser in
fewer lines of code with clojure:

```clojure
(defn example [& children]
  (let [{:keys [data loading error]} (useGetMyData)]
    (into
     [:div
      (cond
        loading [:div "loading"]
        error [:div {:style {:color "red"}} (error :message)]
        :else [:<>
               [:div "data:"]
               [:div {:style {:color "green"}} data]])]
     children)))
```

Clojure is able to pull this off because unlike JavaScript, everything is an
expression! Additionally, like many of these examples, this is only the
beginning. What I really wanted to do in the past was define enums to represent
states of the application based on loading, data and error states. Then, I
wanted to write a switch statement inside of the JSX on the enum to
conditionally render. On the other hand, Clojure gives one the opportunity to
use a `cond` or `case` statement to accomplish this functionally as demonstrated
above.

However, for those of us that still do love JavaScript (yes, I do!), there is a
[pattern matching proposal that TC-39 has on their radar](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pattern-matching).
So perhaps one day my dream of a switch statement inside of JSX will come true.

## In Summary

One of the reasons why I decided to move onto a Clojure shop was that I really
enjoyed functional programming models and I wanted to learn more using one of
the marquee languages for doing it. Even if you don't intend on using Clojure or
ClojureScript in production, it is definitely a useful exercise to try building
functional declarative UIs in them. Try using ClojureScript and Reagent to see
what you do in a language that barely supports mutability of any kind and how
that motivates the JavaScript that you will write in the future. Previously
working with TypeScript has made me miss types and appreciate the runtime checks
of [`spec`](https://clojure.org/guides/spec). There are many
advantages/tradeoffs that come with picking a particular tool. Node is often in
my tool belt so that I can use one language on both the browser and the server.
Clojure is traditionally used on the back end of stacks, and ClojureScript is
what gives it an opportunity to shine on the front end. Many will say Clojure
actually really flexes on the back end with how it sits on top of the JVM. As
convenient as node is, it is nowhere near as fast as the JVM, nor does it
support technologies such as multi-threading out of the box.

If you want to work with Clojure and ClojureScript professionally, we are also
hiring at [Reify Health](https://www.reifyhealth.com/careers)! While you do not
need to know Clojure prior to joining (I didn't!), having a ❤ for functional
programming is always a plus!
